+++
authors = ["jamie"]
title = "the bbc & political neutrality"
description = "here's a belated analysis of a BBC article on transphobia!"
date = 2025-12-18
[taxonomies]
tags = ["bbc", "transgender", "transphobia"]
[extra]
featured = true
+++

{%alert(note=true)%} Due to essays & other commitments, this blog post has been very delayed. I started writing this a day or two after the BBC article came out, so this pre-dates the most recent BBC "neutrality" scandal. This isn't meant to be a comprehensive analysis of the BBC's transphobia, I just wanted to highlight a specific example local to me! Thanks! {%end%}

On the 7th November 2025, the BBC published an article titled "Councillors clash with residents over trans rights". To the untrained eye, this may seem like nothing more than a short piece of local democracy reporting, but if we look just a little closer, we can see how the BBC weaponises ideas of 'neutrality' in favour of transphobic ideals.

I've spoken on this issue to many well-meaning cis peers in the past, who have been shocked that a 'neutral' institution like the BBC releases articles that are nothing of the sort. However, to many trans people this behaviour from the BBC is wholly unsurprising, and this article is in no way the worst offence from the organisation. [This behaviour isn't new either.](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-57853385) Nor is it exclusive to the BBC. It may be more explicit from the likes of the Daily Mail, but this harmful rhetoric has been part of BBC reporting for years, and arguably is in some ways more harmful coming from respected institutions like the BBC, where people can believe (more so than the Daily Mail) that their reporting is to be trusted.

There are a few specific bits to pick apart with this article, that hopefully highlight how seemingly 'unbiased' and 'neutral' reporting can be anything but, and how apparently innocuous details harbour something far more insidious. Whilst I'm doing the legwork here, I'm hoping that for any cis individuals reading, this gives an idea of the things to look out for when reading stories on trans people in the mainstream media.

Let's start with the title, describing how councillors clashed with "residents". By naming individuals as mere residents, we misplace their positionality. I had a look into the records of the council meetings, and many of these "residents" had submitted multiple questions and statements that incited transphobia, with a few of them also having attended multiple meetings. This is not to say that the people in question *aren't* residents, but by calling them as such, the BBC feigns their innocence. It's the same logic as people who 'just have concerns' about trans people. Two of these "residents" are Wendy Stephenson and Phoebe Beedell, both of whom have been unwavering in their engagement with the council. Additionally, they are both members of "Women of Wessex"; a transphobic grassroots organisation. Phoebe Beedell is also a Senior Research Associate affiliated with the University of Bristol. She works under the School for Policy Studies; the same school that hosted notorious transphobe, [Alice Sullivan, back in October](https://www.bristol.ac.uk/sps/events/2025/prof-alice-sullivan-seminar.html). Hardly neutral residents.

The obfuscating language continues, with the article stating that the meeting "became confrontational when women's rights campaigners attended". Many trans allies have been critical of the framing of 'women's rights campaigners'. Not only does this obfuscate their transphobia, but it gives undue legitimacy toward their status as advocates for *genuine* women's issues. Many a TERF has been criticised for ignoring women's issues in favour of their transphobic tirades.

If we dig just a little deeper, the piece comes from the Local Democracy Reporting Service, and as such, has also been published on Bristol Live, and B24/7, under the titles "Bristol Green councillors wield pro-trans placards as war of words with women's rights activists reignites" and "Green councillors accused of being 'intimidating and offensive' by holding up pro-trans placards" respectively. Aside from the titles, the two local prints of the article are identical. Interestingly, the BBC version has made some major edits. The majority of these consist in cutting quotes from the council meeting itself, which mainly impact on the general readability of the article as a whole. Additionally,  when talking about the Supreme Court ruling, the local version specifies that the "word 'woman' in the Equality Act refers only to biological sex at birth", where the BBC version states that it refers "to biological sex." This follows the BBC's change to their style when writing about trans women, where they will now only refer to a trans woman as a "biological male that identifies as a woman", clearly following the TERF handbook. Again, this is not new behaviour from the BBC. Their air of neutrality does nothing but manufacture consent for transphobia.

As a final point of interest, during the November council meeting, there were 42 total public statements, and 33 public questions received. Of these, 3 and 6 were related to trans issues respectively. Most statements and questions concerned the controversy surrounding the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood scheme.
